These unexpected Super Bowl snacks will add global flair to your game-day spread

By Mia Taylor Features correspondent

Quentin Bacon

From sweet-soy chicken wings to flaky curry puffs, here are five recipes to give your Super Bowl party snacks an intercontinental edge.

The Super Bowl is about so much more than the game. There are the advertisements, of course, and the half-time show. And this year, there may also be some Taylor Swift sightings thrown into the mix. Super Bowl party food is also an integral part of the overall game-day extravaganza. While there are plenty of tried-and-true party staples for such gatherings – nachos, chilli, cheese dips and the like – those looking to expand their party food repertoire would do well with some international flavours that are bound to impress guests.

From enhancing chicken wings with a soy sauce-based recipe to incorporating a Danish comfort dish, here are five options to make any Super Bowl spread delicious and globally inspired.

Black Sheep Staff

ArChan Chan's Swiss chicken wings are usually poached in water then cooked in soy sauce, sugar and spices (Credit: Black Sheep Staff)

There are chicken wings, and then there are Swiss wings. The latter are glossy, sticky and sweet. No, they're not actually from Switzerland: it turns out the Swiss had nothing to do with the recipe. These chicken wings are served in cafes or diners across Hong Kong.

"While no one is quite certain where Swiss chicken wings originated, rumour is that it was a classic case of translation gone wrong," said ArChan Chan, executive chef of Ho Lee Fook, a creative Chinese restaurant in Hong Kong.

These mouth-watering wings are typically poached in water and then cooked in soy sauce, sugar and spices until the wings have turned a reddish hue. When done cooking, the juicy wings are coated in a glossy, caramelised sweet-soy sauce.

Columbus Leth

Meatballs are a classic comfort food beloved by all three Scandinavian nations (Credit: Columbus Leth)

If it's comfort food you're after for a Super Bowl spread, look no further than the frikadeller. These meatballs are favourites throughout Denmark, Sweden and Norway. "We all have different words for them," says food historian Nina Bauer. "In Denmark, we call a ball of meat that is pan-fried a frikadelle." Not only are they a classic food across Scandinavian countries, but they're also easy to make for a large gathering and can be made in multiple ways: options include being spiced with curry sauce or served in a hearty gravy. And to clear up any confusion ahead of time: crispy frikadellers are not the same thing as Swedish meatballs, which are made smooth, are smaller, and typically have a rounder shape.

Mogan Anthony

Seleste Tan and Mogan Anthony's curry puff at Lady Wong (Credit: Mogan Anthony)

A spicy and flaky snack made of curried potatoes, onions, peas and corn, flaky curry puffs were historically sold by street vendors throughout Malaysia and Singapore. More recently, however, they've found their way across the globe and are available in New York City at Southeast Asian patisserie and cake shop Lady Wong, which is run by pastry chefs Seleste Tan and her husband Mogan Anthony.

"Curry puffs are so Southeast Asian and remind you of childhood since you could buy them from the cafeteria, night markets, grocery shops, street vendors, restaurants or even at hotels," says Anthony. "It's cheap to make, satisfies our soul, and the ingredients are available year-round." The recipe, he added, is "no fuss" with "no special techniques needed".

Similar to Southern European and Latin American empanadas or South Asian samosas, the tasty and popular curry puff creations served at Lady Wong are so popular that they typically sell out each day by 14:00-15:00.

Quentin Bacon

Bricia Lopez's Pollo in Guajillo (Credit: Quentin Bacon)

Often a party favourite, asada takes on a spicy and tangy kick with this recipe that relies heavily on chillies, citrus and spices. Asada is a popular dish for Mexican communities that live in Los Angeles, explains Bricia Lopez, author of the cookbook Asada: The Art of Mexican Grilling, and it's linked to their heritage.

"Asadas are about love, friendship, family and community," Lopez adds. "Every Mexican household has a big asada. It's a moment for us to get together with family."

The Mexican tradition of carne asada can be traced back to the 16th Century, according to Lopez. That's when Spanish Jesuit colonisers settled in northern and north-eastern Mexico. They also simultaneously developed the cattle industry, and beef became a major part of the local fare.

For those not familiar, carne asada is grilled marinated steak. Typically, it's enjoyed in a taco or burrito. But serving asada in places like Mexico and Los Angeles is also cause for a social event, so what better dish to add to a Super Bowl menu?

Westend61 GmbH/Alamy

Fatteh has roots in Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria (Credit: Westend61 GmbH/Alamy)

One more mouth-watering dish to consider for your game day spread, fatteh is a layered Middle Eastern dish typically made up of poached meat or chicken, chickpeas, toasted pita bread and garlic yoghurt. On top of all of this, you add a layer of pine nuts. It's a simple dish to pull together and very tasty.

Fatteh has an extensive history throughout Middle Eastern cultures. It may have initially been created in Egypt, but later spread to what is now Israel, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria.

Making it even more appealing for the big game day? Fatteh is traditionally served as a convivial dish. For instance, it was often part of the meals served during the Fatimid Caliphate in Egypt from 969-1171 CE, a time when rulers would host street feasts for Eid al-Fitr, which marks the end of the month of Ramadan fasting. Fatteh also showed up regularly amid great banquets of the time.

The exact way it's made varies throughout the region. Sometimes it includes tomato sauce or layers of stuffed eggplant, for instance.

"Fatteh is a very important dish in the Lebanese repertoire… and for me, fatteh is a great dinner party dish," says Anissa Helou, a Lebanese chef and cookbook author who won the Foodics Icon Award as part of Middle East & North Africa's 50 Best Restaurants 2023. "You can prepare everything ahead of time and just assemble it at the last minute."

BBC.com's World's Table "smashes the kitchen ceiling" by changing the way the world thinks about food, through the past, present and future.

---

Join more than three million BBC Travel fans by liking us on Facebook, or follow us on Twitter and Instagram.
If you liked this story, sign up for The Essential List newsletter – a handpicked selection of features, videos and can't-miss news delivered to your inbox every Friday.