Beyond Snoop Dogg's cereal: Surprising celebrity-led food and drink brands

By Nafeesah Allen Features correspondent

Getty Images

Snoop Dogg's cereal is making headlines, but he's far from the only celebrity with a food or drink brand. From bourbon to ice cream, these are the most fascinating celeb-led lines you've likely never heard of.

Snoop Dogg recently made headlines – but it was for breakfast cereal, not music. The brand Broadus Foods, founded by Calvin Broadus (otherwise known as Snoop Dogg) and No Limit Records founder Percy Miller (known as Master P) recently sued supermarket giant Walmart for allegedly conspiring with Post Consumer brands to sabotage their products by hiding the cereal from customers and claiming it was out of stock.

Snoop Dogg might not be the first person you associate with cereal, but he isn't the only unlikely celeb in the food and beverage market. Dan Mazei, marketing and communications expert at Tangled Roots, says there's good reason for that. "We are still in the middle of a cultural idealisation of personalities, particularly big-name celebrities. It's no surprise, then, to see that celeb-backed food and beverage brands – two of the most culturally attuned and nimble product categories on Earth – have been incredibly successful in both their marketing and initial sales," he explains.

Alamy

George Clooney's Casamigos tequila is one of the most well-known celebrity drink brands (Credit: Alamy)

And while George Clooney's Casamigos tequila and Cardi B's WhipShots are well known, there are many celeb-led companies that are more like cult classics than box office hits. Katie Klencheski, founder of Smakk Studios, a Brooklyn-based creative agency, says, "brands where the celebrity is an obvious attention grab and has little to no relationship with the category or 'why' behind the brand can do more harm than good". But well-formed matches like Venus Willams' Happy Viking and Jennifer Garner's Once Upon a Farm Organics are win-win examples.

Like Snoop's cereals, these seven celebrity-owned brands have sticking power.

Cher

The singer and actress Cher, known for hit songs such as Believe and movies like Moonstruck, also founded a brand of gelato called Cherlato. The line boasts a selection of unique flavors – like the vegan variety Heavenly Hazelnut and Breakfast at Cher's Coffee & Donuts – as varied as her music.

Eric LeGrand

Eric LeGrand a former Rutgers University football player who suffered a career-ending spinal cord injury during a game at Rutgers University. Despite this, in 2012, he was signed to the Tampa Bay Buccaneers in a symbolic gesture. Now, he's an inspirational speaker and the face of Eric LeGrand Bourbon, his eponymous whiskey brand, launched in March 2023.

"Many times, people see someone who has a disability in a wheelchair, they think that they can't enjoy alcohol and other finer things. I want them to know that's not true and I want to end that stigma," says LeGrand. The brand promises to donate $5.20 (£4.68) of every case sold to the Christopher & Dana Reeve Foundation, supporting those living with paralysis.

Patti Labelle

With hit songs like Lady Marmalade and On My Own, Patti LaBelle has been a household name for over five decades. Beyond music, Patti ventured into the food industry with her brand, Patti's Good Life. Launched in 2015, her products include soul food desserts such as sweet potato pies, cobblers and sauces. Her products are sold in various grocery stores across the United States, including Walmart and Kroger. Prices vary depending on the item, but her famous sweet potato pie typically costs less than $4 (£3.17).

Curtis '50 Cent' Jackson

Rapper 50 Cent has a fascinating story, iconic fans and corporate positions in brands including G-Unit Films and Cheetah Vision. In 2019, Jackson launched Branson Cognac, a premium cognac brand. The spirit is the official cognac of the Houston Rockets and Sacramento Kings. Prices range from around $50-$250 (£39-£198) per bottle.

Getty Images

Trejo's Donuts are made in small batches and even come in vegan varieties (Credit: Getty Images)

Danny Trejo

Danny Trejo has been a working actor for well over four decades. Known for his frequent tough-guy character in film and TV, and he's also done voice acting in the kids' series Monsters at Work and The Ghost and Molly McGee.

He's also an entrepreneur: There are currently four Los Angeles locations of his restaurant brand, Trejo's Tacos. Trejo, who is sober, is known for serving non-alcoholic mocktails. And if the Mexican-inspired flavours of his taqueria aren't enough, Trejo has branched out into donuts, as well. Trejo's Donuts are made in small batches and even come in vegan varieties. Fans anxious to make them at home can also grab his cookbook.

Jon Bon Jovi

Proud Jersey boy Jon Bon Jovi launched the JBJ Soul Kitchen, a community restaurant that touts a pay-what-you-can model and serves farm-to-table meals at four New Jersey locations. Built to fight food insecurity, the four locations have no prices on the menu and – people can opt to eat for free. Building on this philanthropic principle, Bon Jovi's foundation expanded into JBJ Soul Seasonings, offering a line of spices.

Tom Hanks
Academy award-winning actor, and all-around nice guy, Tom Hanks, is currently a producer of the Apple TV+ show Masters of the Air – and the owner of Hanx Coffee, a range of premium coffee beans and blends. Ethically and sustainably sourced from farmers around the globe, the coffee's sales profits support veterans and military families.